MFLT-8154 Cookbook Recipe - Using Memfault for Low Bandwidth Devices (#354)
memfault/memfault-docs: docs/best_practices/low-bandwidth-devices.mdx

different network topologies including LoraWAN, LTE, and satellite connections
to continuously capture device data. Typically, extremely bandwidth-constrained
devices will be MCU based. We'll focus on MCU devices in this article. The
recommendations here are relevant to other systems as well. In these cases, make
sure you define and adjust the metrics specific to your system before applying
these principles.

The Memfault engineering team is always designing systems with the explicit goal
of minimizing bandwidth requirements. Being mindful of bandwidth use reduces
network costs and device power consumption for IoT operators. Even customers who
maintain devices with significant bandwidth available benefit from this
engineering mandate. One example of that effort is outlined in the
[design goals](/docs/mcu/event-serialization-overview/#design-goals) for how
Memfault implements event serialization.

In this guide, we will walk through how to best configure your MCU devices when
using Memfault in low-bandwidth scenarios, and demonstrate the meaningful data
Memfault's SDK collects even while operating with limited bandwidth.

> ## Memfault Best Practices Operating low-bandwidth Devices

Reviewer: Each of these should have a 1-2 sentence about why they should care (within the appropriate section, not in the list itself)

- This flag controls the compression of coredumps which saves between 10-50% of the coredump transfer depending on how many repeated bytes there are.
- This flag controls whether human-readable ASCII logs are persisted or whether Memfault's compact log system is used, which saves on average 50-70% ...
- Each metric is about 6-8 bytes, so capturing metrics do ultimately add up, but are quite minimal.
- etc.

MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY_DEFINE(LteNetworkBytesOut, kMemfaultMetricType_Unsigned)

```

#### Instrument your firmware with the new transport metrics

Include the metrics instrumentation code supplied by Memfault's SDK in code
paths where data is being sent or received over the network.

```c
#include "memfault/metrics/metrics.h"
// [ ... ]
void lte_radio_send_and_receive_bytes(const void *data, size_t data_len) {
  memfault_metrics_heartbeat_add(MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY(LteNetworkBytesOut), data_len);
  // [ ... code to send LTE data ... ]
}

void lte_radio_receive_bytes(const void *data, size_t received_data_len) {
  // [ ... code to receive data over LTE]
  memfault_metrics_heartbeat_add(MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY(LteNetworkBytesIn), received_data_len);
}
```

#### Verify heartbeat includes data transport metrics

After deploying the new software version with new metrics configured, view the
[Events Debug](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/events) log
and open a `heartbeat`. The heartbeat should contain `LteNetworkBytesOut` and
`LteNetworkBytesIn` key-value pairs if the instrumented code paths have been

> called. Link troubleshooting data transfer docs if you don't see any values in

Author: Will link to new troubleshooting page.

the metrics payload.

> ### Increase Heartbeat Interval

Reviewer: Probably worth adding a note that making this number larger will only affect the resolution of the data on a per-device view. Aggregates and fleet level rollups will still be as accurate. 

Maybe provide an example? Maybe LTE bytes transferred is a good one since it's mentioned in this article.

Author: > Maybe provide an example? Maybe LTE bytes transferred is a good one since it's mentioned in this article.

Can I get a little more context about what you mean here?

Reviewer: If hourly heartbeats are used and 1000 bytes are sent every hour, then each heartbeat will have a value of 1000 for LTEBytesSent. If daily heartbeats are used, then the hearbeat value for LTEBytesSent will be 24000. The quality of the data remains the same, but the resolution is decreased. It's a pretty slick tradeoff.

Reviewer: I would also recommend people increase heartbeat interval before removing metrics.

By default, heartbeats are collected every 3600 seconds. Decreasing the
frequency of heartbeats saves bandwidth. Let's modify the collection interval to
6 hours.

Add the following to your projects `memfault_platform_config.h`:

##### memfault_platform_config.h

```c
//! @file memfault_platform_config

#define MEMFAULT_METRICS_HEARTBEAT_INTERVAL_SECS 21600
```

Note that the 6-hour collection interval is a guideline. Adjust based on your
use case. Take a look at the article
[monitoring fleet health with heartbeat metrics](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/device-heartbeat-metrics)
on Interrupt.

### Reduce Metrics Usage

Pulling metrics selectively will decrease the amount of bandwidth your fleet

> requires. Here's a recommended list of metrics Memfault believes are essential

Author: Considering if it makes sense to include the list of metrics we maintain here or not.

to use the default configuration value disabling event serial inclusion.

### Verify `MEMFAULT_DATA_SOURCE_RLE_ENABLED` is enabled

This is enabled by default in the Memfault SDK configuration. If it has been
modified, remove the configuration from your `memfault_platform_config.h` file
to use the default configuration value enabling data source RLE.

### Increase minimum logging level `MEMFAULT_RAM_LOGGER_DEFAULT_MIN_LOG_LEVEL`

Increasing the minimum logging level will reduce the number of logs Memfault
collects. We recommend collecting error logs only when device bandwidth is
limited. The exact collection level and instrumentation will depend on your
logging implementation. You can learn more about how Memfault collects logs in
the [docs](/docs/mcu/logging/).

```c
//! @file memfault_platform_config

//! Controls default log level that will be saved to https://mflt.io/logging
#ifndef MEMFAULT_RAM_LOGGER_DEFAULT_MIN_LOG_LEVEL
#define MEMFAULT_RAM_LOGGER_DEFAULT_MIN_LOG_LEVEL kMemfaultPlatformLogLevel_Error
#endif
```

Note the technical tradeoff of reduced log collection is limiting the
availability of useful context when debugging device issues.

### Use OTA Delta Releases

> If you're using Memfault OTA, leverage delta releases wherever possible. This

Reviewer: The problem with delta releases is they are super difficult and tricky, and engineers know this.

It's probably worth wording slightly differently:

> If you're using Memfault OTA and you need firmware update binaries to be as small as possible, using Delta Updates is a potential strategy. However, they come with their own complexities and it's worth carefully considering whether they are worth it. You can read up ... and ....

type of release delivers smaller payloads to devices during an update. Review
our docs on [Delta Releases](/docs/platform/ota/#delta-releases) for more
in-depth coverage. You can also check out a post on Interrupt about
[OTA delta updates](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/ota-delta-updates).

## Collecting Coredumps With Bandwidth Limitations

Coredumps provide valuable insights for developers while troubleshooting device
issuess. If you've got enough bandwidth, there are a few modifications available
for capturing coredumps more efficiently.

> ### Fleet-wide Coredump Custom Sampling

Author: iirc weren't we talking about getting rid of this suggestion?

> ### Fleet-wide Coredump Custom Sampling

Reviewer: It's a creative solution. 

For example, at a previous employer, we had a million devices in the field. We had a 4 byte metric that we reported every hour that was the PC register (program counter), which recorded the function the device was currently running. With all million devices and 24 hours a day, we were able to paint a pretty clear picture where our firmware was spending most of their time (computing algorithms, doing BLE transfer, sleeping, etc.) It was like having a poor-man's distributed profiler. 

It's not something I would suggest in our primary documentation or tell everyone to measure, but it was pretty cool and it's worth a mention in fringe documentation. 

I feel the same about the coredump sampling. It's not something I would build into the SDK, but I think it's a creative way to keep coredumps enabled but severely limit the number that the devices must transfer. If someone *wants* coredumps but *cannot* due to bandwidth constraints, they would want to do something like this. 

The article is just as much as telling customers how to limit the bandwidth as much as possible, but also about how to get the most value out of Memfault as possible given a constraint they might not be happy with (100 bytes per day for instance).

trend changes in fleet bandwidth usage. Navigate to the
[Metric Chart](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/metrics?newMetricChart)
and create the following charts:

1. Aggregate the mean of metric `LteNetworkBytesOut`.
2. Aggregate the mean of metric `LteNetworkBytesIn`.

Network consumption regressions are common. Following the metric trends will
highlight historical changes in bandwidth consumption. Combined with threshold
alerts, metric dashboards are powerful tools for analyzing device performance
across different software versions. When a new version is deployed, developers
can monitor these dashboards and alerts for anomalous network consumption. This
analysis becomes even more interesting when leveraging Memfault's OTA. You can
create a new release and activate a
[staged rollout](/docs/platform/ota/#staged-rollout-of-a-release). This allows
for more confident testing of new software versions on a percentage of devices
in the field. If the new version contains code causing an increase in network
utilization, the version rollout can be reverted without the entire fleet being
impacted by the issue.

> #### Using Reduced Coredumps

Author: Let's chat about the placement of this section

---
id: low-bandwidth-devices
title: Using Memfault with Low-Bandwidth Devices
sidebar_label: Low-Bandwidth Devices
---

> IoT devices are being deployed all over the world. Many of these devices are

Reviewer: ```suggestion
IoT devices are being deployed all over the world, and many of these devices are
```

connected to the internet using a variety of network topologies including
options like LTE, LoRaWAN, and satellite connectivity. Without a standard Wi-Fi

> connection, bandwidth is often more constrained and metered by a network

Reviewer: ```suggestion
connection, bandwidth is often constrained and metered by a network
```

> carrier. Many devices are bandwidth-constrained due to the cost of each kilobyte

Reviewer: ```suggestion
carrier. Many of these devices are ultimately bandwidth-constrained due to the cost of each kilobyte
```

> sent or received, and some devices are further limited by the intermittent

Reviewer: Love this. A+

availability of their network source.

Memfault was built from the ground up to handle devices with limited bandwidth,
intermittent connectivity, and minimal processing power capabilities. Today,

> Memfault is being used successfully in bandwidth-constrained environments. We
> have customers maintaining devices with a limited 400 bytes per day.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memfault is being used successfully in bandwidth-constrained environments, and some 
customers are successfully using the service while restricted to 400 bytes per day!
```

Reviewer: Commit this

In this article, we'll cover how to tune Memfault's SDK, and use the product to
effectively operate bandwidth-constrained IoT devices. **Following these best
practices will lead to reduced network costs and device power consumption for
IoT operators**. We'll focus primarily on covering the setup for MCU-based

> devices since these fleets are more commonly limited in connectivity. This

Reviewer: ```suggestion
devices since these fleets are more commonly limited in connectivity. but the
```

guidance is generally applicable to other supported platforms as well.

> ## Memfault Best Practices Operating Low-Bandwidth Devices

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Best Practices Operating Low-Bandwidth Devices
```

These are best practices, some of which are applied simply by integrating with
Memfault, crafted from working with customers who have deployed low-bandwidth
devices in the field.

:::info

Before implementing these configurations, make sure you've got a handle on your
network availability.

:::

### Efficient Device Data Collection

> Memfault provides a variety of features out of the box that accommodates devices
> with bandwidth constraints. Device data is collected with
> [Event serialization](/docs/mcu/event-serialization-overview) combined with
> compression using RLE (Run-length encoding) which minimizes payload size in
> transit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memfault provides a variety of features out of the box that accommodates devices
with bandwidth constraints. Most of the data sent to Memfault is [efficiently serialized](/docs/mcu/event-serialization-overview) and compressed using RLE (Run-length encoding) which minimizes the payload size in
transit.
```

> ### Multi-day Chunk Uploads

Reviewer: Any reason these two are in the section about best practices? They aren't something the user can modify.

EDIT: Noted above in another comment

The Memfault SDK chunks data transported from integrated devices. Data packaged
up for Memfault is buffered on the device. If a coredump upload begins and
cannot be completed during the initial connection, devices will queue the
remaining coredump chunks and continue streaming data when reconnected to the
network. This is a default behavior of the SDK. It's especially useful for
scenarios where network bandwidth is constrained and connectivity is unstable.
You can read more about how data is sent to Memfault in

> [Data from Firmware to the Cloud](/docs/mcu/data-from-firmware-to-the-cloud).

Reviewer: You don't need to explain all of this here, just say it's a cool feature and allows us to be very flexible on network transports and availability and link to the doc.

### Enable Compact Logs

Compact logs control whether human-readable ASCII logs are persisted or whether

> Memfault's compact log system is used. Enabling compact logs will save up to 85%
> of log data usage. Follow the guide on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Memfault's compact log system is used. Enabling compact logs can reduce the size of log storage by up to 85%. 
Follow the guide on
```

[Enabling Compact Logs](/docs/mcu/compact-logs) if you want to collect logs more
efficiently without disabling them entirely.

> ### Collecting Coredumps With Bandwidth Limitations

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Optimizing Coredump Collection
```

Just to not re-use the same words over and over.

Coredumps provide valuable insights for developers while troubleshooting device
issues. If you've got enough bandwidth, there are a few modifications available
for capturing coredumps more efficiently.

> #### Reduce Coredump Size

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Optimize Coredump Size
```

While useful, [Coredump](/docs/mcu/coredumps) collection can inflate network

> expenses due to the average size of a coredump. Luckily Memfault addresses these

Reviewer: I mangled this recommendation so you'll have ot edit it manually.

concerns by providing control over coredump size. Ideally, you can shrink the
average size of a coredump to around 512 bytes. Follow the guidelines available
in
[choosing what to store in a coredump](/docs/mcu/coredumps#choosing-what-to-store-in-a-coredump)
for configuring what data should be included in coredumps.

> #### Fleet-wide Coredump Custom Sampling

Reviewer: Strategic Coredump Collection

I think this can replace the 7. Disable coredumps. 

Here's the story I'd play out here. 

- If coredumps can't always be collected, it's best to collect them from some. Maybe these devices are on a cheaper network
- If all devices are subject to network constraints, try to collect a few of them, maybe collect 10% of them using a sampling method. 
- If coredumps can't be collected at all, then here's how to disable them. 

One thing we always recommend if possible is to always capture and save coredumps on device even if they can't be sent. This is for when devices are ultimately collected or sent back, developers and pull of the latest coredump and investigate any issues that took place.

Collecting data from a percentage of diagnostic events occurring in the field
using a simple fleet-sampling mechanism will reduce the volume of coredumps sent
to Memfault.

> ### Use Metrics Selectively

Reviewer: Mentioned it somewhere else, but this should be lower in the list than longer heartbeats IMO. 

More metrics > less metrics, no matter the resolution.

[Metrics](/docs/platform/metrics/) are a great way to monitor devices. Each
metric you collect increases payload size by between 6-8 bytes. Collecting
metrics selectively will decrease the amount of bandwidth your fleet requires
while giving you insights about overall device health.

:::info

Your mileage will vary by use-case with metrics. Please track the metrics you
think are most relevant for your device's health.

:::

Check out the
[power of metrics webinar](https://go.memfault.com/webinar-power-of-metrics-monitoring-battery-life-connectivity-power-consumption)

> for a more detailed overview of Memfault metrics.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
for a more detailed overview of metrics Memfault recommends to track.
```

Reviewer: Commit this

### Use OTA Delta Releases

If you're using Memfault OTA and you need firmware update binaries to be as
small as possible, using Delta Releases is a potential strategy. However, they
come with additional complexities and it's worth carefully considering whether
they are worth it. Get more in-depth coverage from our docs on
[Delta Releases](/docs/platform/ota/#delta-releases). You can also check out a
post on Interrupt about

> [OTA delta updates](https://interrupt.memfault.com/blog/ota-delta-updates).

Reviewer: Perfect

### Recommended Bandwidth Optimized Device Configurations

Memfault's SDK can be tuned for achieving minimal data collection:

1. Collect Network Utilization Metrics In Heartbeats
2. Set a longer
   [Heartbeat](/docs/mcu/embedded-self-serve/#define-first-heartbeat) interval
   of 6+ hours

> 3. Reduce the number of [Metrics](/docs/mcu/metrics-api) pulled from devices

Reviewer: You wrote about this above.

4. Verify `MEMFAULT_EVENT_INCLUDE_DEVICE_SERIAL` is disabled
5. Verify `MEMFAULT_DATA_SOURCE_RLE_ENABLED` is enabled
6. Increase minimum logging level `MEMFAULT_RAM_LOGGER_DEFAULT_MIN_LOG_LEVEL`

> 7. Disable Coredump Collection

Reviewer: I would remove this one. Recommendation below in another comment.

Take a look at the default configuration
[`default_config.h`](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/7d3396b26f1c161f1c288b6bd39676ec16ebda67/components/include/memfault/default_config.h).
Familiarizing yourself with the standard config, or minimally knowing one exists

> and where to find it is helpful.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and where to find it, is helpful.
```

Reviewer: Commit this

  memfault_metrics_heartbeat_add(MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY(LteNetworkBytesOut), data_len);
  // [ ... code to send LTE data ... ]
}

void lte_radio_receive_bytes(const void *data, size_t received_data_len) {
  // [ ... code to receive data over LTE]
  memfault_metrics_heartbeat_add(MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY(LteNetworkBytesIn), received_data_len);
}
```

#### Verify heartbeat includes data transport metrics

After deploying the new software version with new metrics configured, view the
[Events Debug](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/events) log
and open a `heartbeat`. The heartbeat should contain `LteNetworkBytesOut` and
`LteNetworkBytesIn` key-value pairs if the instrumented code paths have been
called. Link troubleshooting data transfer docs if you don't see any values in
the metrics payload.

### Increase Heartbeat Interval

By default, heartbeats are collected every 3600 seconds. Decreasing the
frequency of heartbeats saves bandwidth. Let's modify the collection interval to
6 hours.

:::info

Increasing this interval will only impact the resolution of data on a per-device
view. Aggregates and fleet-level rollups will still be accurate.

:::

> Add the following to your projects `memfault_platform_config.h`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following to your project's `memfault_platform_config.h`:
```

Memfault. Use the data packetizer mask `kMfltDataSourceMask_Event` for only
collecting the lightweight data sources (reboots, heartbeats, trace events).
This configuration is only set at runtime. Modify any instances you're using the
[utility API](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/d7ed96dabb9fbdb73efd65f895950a17b496b84a/CHANGES.md#chart_with_upwards_trend-improvements-32)
`memfault_packetizer_set_active_sources()`:

```c
memfault_packetizer_set_active_sources(kMfltDataSourceMask_Event);
```

Check out more info in the
[`data_packetizer.h`](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/d7ed96dabb9fbdb73efd65f895950a17b496b84a/components/include/memfault/core/data_packetizer.h)
file.

## Debugging Low-Bandwidth Devices

Now that we've established different Memfault methods that effectively reduce
data collection, let's evaluate how these configurations provide valuable data
for fixing an issue on a bandwidth-constrained device. Importantly, we've
established that even with limited bandwidth, Memfault can collect essential
diagnostic data including coredumps, metrics, and logs.

### Create Metric Charts

> Visualizing metrics on the Memfault dashboard is useful for quickly spotting
> trend changes in fleet bandwidth usage. Navigate to the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Viewing metrics on the Memfault dashboard is useful for quickly spotting
trends in fleet bandwidth usage. Navigate to the
```

Reviewer: Is this going to be committed?

> [Metric Chart](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/metrics?newMetricChart)

Reviewer: Neat - I didn't realize that link would work!

and create the following charts:

1. Aggregate the mean of metric `LteNetworkBytesOut`.
2. Aggregate the mean of metric `LteNetworkBytesIn`.

> Network consumption regressions are common. Following the metric trends will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Between firmware updates, network consumption regressions are common. Tracking these metrics will
```

highlight historical changes in bandwidth consumption. Combined with threshold
alerts, metric dashboards are powerful tools for analyzing device performance
across different software versions. When a new version is deployed, developers
can monitor these dashboards and alerts for anomalous network consumption. This
analysis becomes even more interesting when leveraging Memfault's OTA. You can
create a new release and activate a
[staged rollout](/docs/platform/ota/#staged-rollout-of-a-release). This allows
for more confident testing of new software versions on a percentage of devices
in the field. If the new version contains code causing an increase in network
utilization, the version rollout can be reverted without the entire fleet being
impacted by the issue.

### Set up Device-threshold Alerts

Developers monitoring device health want observability notifications covering
different network-related changes. Memfault combines metric values with
[Device-threshold Alerts](/docs/platform/alerts/#device-threshold-alerts).

> Developers will receive notifications whenever a device reports a specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Developers can receive notifications whenever a device reports a specified
```

Reviewer: Commit this

> value or range of values. Navigate to your
> [Alerts](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/alerts?new). Let's
> configure 2 alerts that are triggered when:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
value or range of values. 

value or range of values. 

To add a Device-threshold Alert, navigate to the
[Alerts](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/alerts?new) page. Let's
configure 2 alerts that are triggered when:
```

> 1. The metric `LteNetworkBytesOut` is greater than your network bandwidth upper

Reviewer: I think it would be nice to introduce an example before instructing a user on how to do this. It gives very little context on why it's useful. 

For example, if a device can use 10 MB in a month and the metric is saying the device is using 1 MB per day, engineers want to know this immediately.

   bound.
2. The metric `LteNetworkBytesIn` is greater than your expected network
   bandwidth upper bound.

Now whenever a device exceeds these thresholds, developers will get a
notification and can jump into finding the root cause of the spike in bandwidth
usage. Moreover, you can use these alerts for pinpointing outlier devices
consuming more bandwidth than the average device in a fleet.

### Usability of Minimal Coredumps

> Fundamentally, nothing about your Memfault user experience changes when

Reviewer: I still think this can be squashed into the section about reducing the size of the coredump. It's a point you can make when you talk about 512 byte coredumps.

It mainly feels out of place here.

collecting smaller coredumps. You'll see issues generated with coredump data
included and logs flowing from the device. This doesn't change even if you chose
a more precise integration path and did not store all device RAM. To see a
Memfault MCU debugging session in action, watch the webinar

> [How to Debug HardFaults on ARM Cortex-M MCUs](https://memfault.com/webinars/how-to-debug-hardfaults-on-arm-cortex-m-mcus/).

Reviewer: This webinar actually doesn't show debugging within Memfault, it's more of a generic how-to debug hard faults in general. 

The Memfault 101 video (https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fZSSrRe9nkA) is a good one to use here.

constraints.

:::

Let's walk through the recommended configurations:

:::info

This assumes you've already integrated the Memfault SDK.

:::

### Collect Network Utilization Metrics In Heartbeats

One metric to make sure to collect is overall network usage, especially if
bandwidth is metered. Collecting device network activity can help quickly
identify regressions in increased data collection on a per-device basis.
Memfault can help with this. One of the
[recommended heartbeat metrics](/docs/mcu/da1469x-sdk-guide/#define-first-heartbeat-metric)
worth tracking is data efficiency. Let's step through an example of how to add a
metric tracking network bytes being transported in and out of a device using LTE
as the primary network transport:

#### Modify your heartbeat config

##### memfault_metrics_heartbeat_config.def

Tracking the network bytes being transported to and from the device provides
operators with insight into their data flow.

```c
//! Define custom system metrics to track. For example,
// MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY_DEFINE(main_task_stack_hwm, kMemfaultMetricType_Unsigned)
// MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY_DEFINE(ble_min_rssi, kMemfaultMetricType_Signed)

> // MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY_DEFINE(mcu_sleep_time_ms, kMemfaultMetricType_Timer)

Reviewer: I would remove these lines

//! @file memfault_metrics_heartbeat_config.def
MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY_DEFINE(LteNetworkBytesIn, kMemfaultMetricType_Unsigned)
MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY_DEFINE(LteNetworkBytesOut, kMemfaultMetricType_Unsigned)

```

#### Instrument your firmware with the new transport metrics

Include the metrics instrumentation code supplied by Memfault's SDK in code
paths where data is being sent or received over the network.

```c
#include "memfault/metrics/metrics.h"
// [ ... ]

> void lte_radio_send_and_receive_bytes(const void *data, size_t data_len) {

Reviewer: This function should be named `lte_radio_send_bytes`

  memfault_metrics_heartbeat_add(MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY(LteNetworkBytesOut), data_len);

>   // [ ... code to send LTE data ... ]

Reviewer: technically the comment should go above the sending of bytes.

}

void lte_radio_receive_bytes(const void *data, size_t received_data_len) {
  // [ ... code to receive data over LTE]
  memfault_metrics_heartbeat_add(MEMFAULT_METRICS_KEY(LteNetworkBytesIn), received_data_len);
}
```

#### Verify heartbeat includes data transport metrics

After deploying the new software version with new metrics configured, view the
[Events Debug](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/events) log
and open a `heartbeat`. The heartbeat should contain `LteNetworkBytesOut` and
`LteNetworkBytesIn` key-value pairs if the instrumented code paths have been
called. Refer to
[Data Transfer Troubleshooting](/docs/troubleshooting/data-transfer-troubleshooting)
if you don't see any values in the metrics payload.

### Increase Heartbeat Interval

By default, heartbeats are collected every 3600 seconds. Decreasing the
frequency of heartbeats saves bandwidth without sacrificing data accuracy. For

> example, if hourly heartbeats are used and 1000 bytes are sent every hour, each

Reviewer: ```suggestion
example, if hourly heartbeats are used and 1000 bytes are sent every hour over an LTE radio, each
```

This configuration is only set at runtime. Modify any instances you're using the
[utility API](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/d7ed96dabb9fbdb73efd65f895950a17b496b84a/CHANGES.md#chart_with_upwards_trend-improvements-32)
`memfault_packetizer_set_active_sources()`:

```c
memfault_packetizer_set_active_sources(kMfltDataSourceMask_Event);
```

Coredumps will still be saved on the device. Disabling this configuration only
ensures coredumps are not sent to Memfault. When you have physical access to the
device you'll still be able to review coredumps. Check out more info in the
[`data_packetizer.h`](https://github.com/memfault/memfault-firmware-sdk/blob/d7ed96dabb9fbdb73efd65f895950a17b496b84a/components/include/memfault/core/data_packetizer.h)
file.

## Debugging Low-Bandwidth Devices

Now that we've established different Memfault methods that effectively reduce
data collection, let's evaluate how these configurations provide valuable data
for fixing an issue on a bandwidth-constrained device. Importantly, we've
established that even with limited bandwidth, Memfault can collect essential
diagnostic data including coredumps, metrics, and logs.

> ### Create Metric Charts

Reviewer: Let's name the problem it solves rather than the feature. 
```suggestion
### Track Data Usage with Metric Charts
```

    alt="LteNetworkBytesOut metrics chart aggregate of mean configuration."
  />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img
    width="800"
    src="/img/docs/best-practices/mcu-low-bandwidth/lte-network-usage-metric-charts.png"
    alt="LTE Network metrics charts."
  />
</p>

Network consumption regressions are common. Following the metric trends will
highlight historical changes in bandwidth consumption. Combined with threshold
alerts, metric dashboards are powerful tools for analyzing device performance
across different software versions. When a new version is deployed, developers
can monitor these dashboards and alerts for anomalous network consumption. This
analysis becomes even more interesting when leveraging Memfault's OTA. You can
create a new release and activate a
[staged rollout](/docs/platform/ota/#staged-rollout-of-a-release). This allows
for more confident testing of new software versions on a percentage of devices
in the field. If the new version contains code causing an increase in network
utilization, the version rollout can be reverted without the entire fleet being
impacted by the issue.

> ### Set up Device-threshold Alerts

Reviewer: Maybe: "Get alerted on high data usage with Alerts"

monitoring want to know about this issue immediately. Memfault combines metric
values with
[Device-threshold Alerts](/docs/platform/alerts/#device-threshold-alerts).
Developers will receive notifications whenever a device reports a specified
value or range of values.

To add a Device-threshold Alert, Navigate to your
[Alerts](https://app.memfault.com/organizations/-/projects/-/alerts?new). Let's
configure 2 alerts that are triggered when:

1. The metric `LteNetworkBytesOut` is greater than your network bandwidth upper
   bound for egress traffic.
2. The metric `LteNetworkBytesIn` is greater than your expected network
   bandwidth upper bound for ingress traffic.

Here's an example of the alert configuration:

<p align="center">
  <img
    width="800"
    src="/img/docs/best-practices/mcu-low-bandwidth/lte-network-bytes-out-device-alert-modal.png"
    alt="LteNetworkBytesOut Device-threshold alert creation."
  />
</p>

<p align="center">
  <img
    width="800"
    src="/img/docs/best-practices/mcu-low-bandwidth/lte-network-usage-device-alerts.png"
    alt="Device-threshold alerts for tracking network bytes usage."
  />
</p>

> Now whenever a device exceeds these thresholds, developers will get a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, whenever a device exceeds these thresholds, developers will get a
```
